Overview

Chronic kidney disease, also called chronic kidney failure, describes the gradual loss of kidney function. Your kidneys filter wastes and excess fluids from your blood, which are then excreted in your urine. When chronic kidney disease reaches an advanced stage, dangerous levels of fluid, electrolytes and wastes can build up in your body.

In the early stages of chronic kidney disease, you may have few signs or symptoms. Chronic kidney disease may not become apparent until your kidney function is significantly impaired.

Treatment for chronic kidney disease focuses on slowing the progression of the kidney damage, usually by controlling the underlying cause. Chronic kidney disease can progress to end-stage kidney failure, which is fatal without artificial filtering (dialysis) or a kidney transplant.

Chronic kidney disease care at Mayo Clinic

How kidneys work

Symptoms

Signs and symptoms of chronic kidney disease develop over time if kidney damage progresses slowly. Signs and symptoms of kidney disease may include:

Nausea

Vomiting

Loss of appetite

Fatigue and weakness

Sleep problems

Changes in how much you urinate

Decreased mental sharpness

Muscle twitches and cramps

Swelling of feet and ankles

Persistent itching

Chest pain, if fluid builds up around the lining of the heart

Shortness of breath, if fluid builds up in the lungs

High blood pressure (hypertension) that's difficult to control

Signs and symptoms of kidney disease are often nonspecific, meaning they can also be caused by other illnesses. Because your kidneys are highly adaptable and able to compensate for lost function, signs and symptoms may not appear until irreversible damage has occurred.

When to see a doctor

Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms of kidney disease.

If you have a medical condition that increases your risk of kidney disease, your doctor is likely to monitor your blood pressure and kidney function with urine and blood tests during regular office visits. Ask your doctor whether these tests are necessary for you.

Causes

Normal kidney vs. diseased kidney Open pop-up dialog box Close Normal kidney vs. diseased kidney Normal kidney vs. diseased kidney A normal kidney has about 1 million filtering units. Each unit, called a glomerulus, connects to a tubule, which collects urine. Conditions such as high blood pressure and diabetes take a toll on kidney function by damaging these filtering units and collecting tubules and causing scarring.

Polycystic kidney Open pop-up dialog box Close Polycystic kidney Polycystic kidney A healthy kidney (left) eliminates waste from the blood and maintains the body's normal chemical balance. Fluid-filled sacs (right), called cysts, characterize polycystic kidney disease.

Chronic kidney disease occurs when a disease or condition impairs kidney function, causing kidney damage to worsen over several months or years.

Diseases and conditions that cause chronic kidney disease include:

Type 1 or type 2 diabetes

High blood pressure

Glomerulonephritis (gloe-mer-u-low-nuh-FRY-tis), an inflammation of the kidney's filtering units (glomeruli)

Interstitial nephritis (in-tur-STISH-ul nuh-FRY-tis), an inflammation of the kidney's tubules and surrounding structures

Polycystic kidney disease

Prolonged obstruction of the urinary tract, from conditions such as enlarged prostate, kidney stones and some cancers

Vesicoureteral (ves-ih-koe-yoo-REE-tur-ul) reflux, a condition that causes urine to back up into your kidneys

Recurrent kidney infection, also called pyelonephritis (pie-uh-low-nuh-FRY-tis)

Risk factors

Factors that may increase your risk of chronic kidney disease include:

Diabetes

High blood pressure

Heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease

Smoking

Obesity

Being African-American, Native American or Asian-American

Family history of kidney disease

Abnormal kidney structure

Older age

Complications

Chronic kidney disease can affect almost every part of your body. Potential complications may include:

Fluid retention, which could lead to swelling in your arms and legs, high blood pressure, or fluid in your lungs (pulmonary edema)

A sudden rise in potassium levels in your blood (hyperkalemia), which could impair your heart's ability to function and may be life-threatening

Heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease

Weak bones and an increased risk of bone fractures

Anemia

Decreased sex drive, erectile dysfunction or reduced fertility

Damage to your central nervous system, which can cause difficulty concentrating, personality changes or seizures

Decreased immune response, which makes you more vulnerable to infection

Pericarditis, an inflammation of the saclike membrane that envelops your heart (pericardium)

Pregnancy complications that carry risks for the mother and the developing fetus

Irreversible damage to your kidneys (end-stage kidney disease), eventually requiring either dialysis or a kidney transplant for survival

Prevention

To reduce your risk of developing kidney disease: